Cheerleader left with huge hole in forehead thanks to tanning addiction
Keri Lynn Noble, 29, from Ohio, USA, was first diagnosed in 2016 after noticing a small scab on her forehead that wouldn't heal
A tanning addict was left with a huge hole in her forehead after her sunbed obsession led to cancer.

Keri Lynn Noble, 29, felt pressure to looked tanned while performing as a cheerleader at football games.

But when the cruise ship worker noticed a small scab on her forehead, she never expected it would lead to a cancer diagnosis and multiple surgeries leaving her with a hole in her head

Keri said: "I was first diagnosed in 2016 when I noticed a scab on the forehead that wouldn’t heal.

"With the brush of my T-shirt or when I washed my face the scab always would open up, and that’s when I knew something was wrong.

"I work on cruise ships so I had to wait until I was home to see my family’s skin doctor - he determined it was a basil cell carcinoma and it needed to be removed.

"The doctor never said it was directly because of the sunbeds, but a mix of sun over-exposure and the beds is what caused it."

Keri had been going on sunbeds since the age of 16 as it was something all girls her age was doing
Keri, from Cincinnati, Ohio, said: "I was a cheerleader for my high school and I always wanted to look tanned in my uniform.

"Throughout high school I was using the tanning beds more and more; all the girls on the cheerleading team wanted to be tanned before the football and basketball games and before any school and dances too.

"After college I went to school for dance and I was on the dance team there.

"As I was still in the public eye a lot, I wanted to make sure I looked like the complete package."

After Keri's diagnosis in 2016, she underwent MOHS surgery, which is a precise surgical technique used to treat skin cancer.

During MOHS surgery, thin layers of cancer-containing skin are progressively removed and examined until only cancer-free tissue remains
I remember growing up my mother always talked to me about skincare and how skin cancer runs in the family but I would just brush it off and tell her I have more of my father's skin type.

"The wound healed up nicely after the surgery and for two years I thought I was in the clear until I saw the scab reappear in the same place on my forehead.

"It began to open again with a slight brush of anything - I knew it wasn’t good."

Last year Keri went to see the same doctor as before and confirmed her worst fears that the skin cancer had returned and that she needed to undergo the MOHS surgery once again.

She said: "At that time I was extremely scared as I thought the whole piece was removed and now it was back.

"This time during the MOHS procedure, the doctor had to go back in five times to remove layers of skin. The tiny skin cancer had doubled in size and turned into a tumour the size of a golf ball
At this point he looked at me and said I have to be sent to a plastic surgeon."

Keri went on to see a plastic surgeon who she says 'made miracles happen'.

The surgeon closed up the golf ball sized tumour on Keri's forehead by moving and stretching the skin from her eyebrow to connect with the skin on her hairline.

She added: "I was so pleased everything went to plan and that he [the surgeon] was able to do the procedure.

"They didn’t think it was even possible but he made it happen.

"For about two months I had one eyebrow lifted about two inches from the other, but now it has been five months and my eyebrow is almost the back to normal - you can hardly even tell I had the procedure
Following her ordeal, Keri now takes all measures to ensure she is protected from sun damage and advises others to do the same.

She said: "I now never leave the house without sunscreen and a cute hat!

"While the sun is something keeping everyone on earth alive, it affects each and everyone of us when we are overexposed.

"Everyone these days are trying to look the best they can look and sun tan if often associated with that!

"If we are eating healthy and keeping our bodies healthy - we need to make sure we keep our skin healthy too