GPs say they are misdiagnosing patients because appointment slots are too short. 

A survey of family doctors found more than one in three said they had failed to properly diagnose cases because they did not have enough time to fully assess them.

Typically, the time slot to see a patient is around 10 minutes. 

The poll of 200 GPs found that 95 per cent of those surveyed said such slots were too short to do their jobs safely. 

More than 70 per cent of those polled said they needed at least 15 minutes per person to properly assess them, with 30 per cent saying at least 20 minutes were needed. 

The research, conducted by law firm Slater and Gordon, found that more time to see patients was the biggest priority cited by GPs, when asked about what would improve their working lives
Professor Helen Stokes-Lampard, Chairman of the Royal College of GPs, said: "It has been clear for some time that the standard 10-minute appointment is no longer fit for purpose. 

“As GPs, we want to be able to deliver truly holistic care to our patients,” she said.  

“But when you consider that very few patients now come to us with just one health-related condition, and that we are increasingly up against the clock in consultations, this is simply not possible and in some cases it could be unsafe.”

The RCGP has warned of shortages of 6,000 GPs.

Dr Stokes-Lampard said it would not be possible to provide longer consultations unless the shortfall of doctors was addressed. 

Clinical negligence expert Parm Sahota, from Slater and Gordon, said: “Working in this area of law I already knew GPs were stretched, but the timeframes they are expected to practice within are suffocating.”

Dr Eleanor Holmes, who qualified as a GP 11 years ago, said she had taken a sabbatical because she could not find a way to make it “healthy or safe” to continue working
“A ‘typical’ workload is 30 patients each day, over 10 to 12 hours,” she said. 

“For most GPs it’s like you’re on a treadmill, you’re treated like expendable machines under unrelenting pressure. Most GPs want to do their very best for their patients, but the system will not let them. Often doctors burnout, suffer significant mental health problems, or leave the profession.”

Health officials say a five-year deal for GPs will mean longer appointment times for those who need them, with more use of other staff such as physiotherapists and nurses, to carry out duties now performed by family doctors.  

An NHS spokesperson said: “Individual doctors decide on the length of appointments and if a patient needs a longer consultation, they should be given it.

“The recent GP Patient Survey showed that more than nine in 10 patients trusted their GP, and more than eight in 10 people described their experience at their GP practice as good or better.”

Want the best of The Telegraph direct to your email and WhatsApp? Sign up to our free twice-daily Front Page newsletter and new audio briefings