Anonymous Instagram Influencer Complains About Working Eight Hour Day Since Likes Were Hidden
The dust is now starting to settle on Instagram users after the platform made the big decision to hide the number of likes from people's profiles. While you'll still be able to see how many you get, no one else will know - and that's been causing issues for some people.


One person, who describes themselves has a social media influencer, has rung a Sydney radio station to complain that the sudden change has resulted in her having to work more because she can't make as much off Instagram anymore.


The anonymous user, clearly wanting to keep their name out of the debate in case of backlash, spoke to Kyle and Jackie O about her experience
"I used to work [on my Instagram] six hours a day, but now I'm working eight hours a day because the 'likes' are going down," she said. "Since the change happened, I'm getting roughly 1,200 likes a day now.


"I do [social media] as a full-time job, and I have a full-time job at the same time."


I can't imagine any employer wanting to see one of their staff spend as much time on social media as they do at their actual job. Whether she's doing it at the same time, or just either side of the full-time job, that's a hard graft she's putting in.


Radio announcer Kyle asked her: "You travel around taking photos with your bestie, and make money off that?"


"Yes, I even [make money] off the airlines too. That's how you get sponsored and get free flights too," she replied.


"Every [one] thousand likes we get, we probably get around $1,000."
I mean, no one would shake a stick at getting a grand every day, especially if she's treating it like a full-time job.


This anonymous social media influencer isn't the only one who is complaining about Instagram's decision and some are resorting to begging their followers for comments.


That's what muscle man Hossein Balapour decided to do by sharing a picture of himself on the social media platform completely naked.
The fitness star - whose 'Yakiboy' account has more than 253,000 followers - posted the nude with his privates covered by a pizza emoji, and he encouraged people in the caption to comment on the slice on lieu of likes.


He said: "Instagram got rid of the likes. Now all we have left is the comments... so let's see how many comments this pizza can get."


Mia Garlick, Facebook Australia and New Zealand director of policy, said the no likey trial in Australia is intended to 'remove the pressure' on Instagram users