Given the events of the last few weeks, I think it is important for all of us who love the Thunder to reflect on where we have been, where we are now, and most importantly where we are going — as well as how we plan to get there.

First, a look back. It is impossible to overstate the magnitude of what we as a community have experienced together over the last 11 years. The players who have worn the Thunder uniform, and the fans who have gathered to support them, have had an effect on our home that goes far beyond basketball. The bond between the team and its fans has changed lives, boosted the local economy, transformed our downtown, and — perhaps most importantly — brought confidence and recognition to a city and a state that has too often been overlooked.

The words “Oklahoma City” are now known across the world, recognized for iconic players, consistent high-level success, and an unbreakable connection between a city and its team. Sports in a small market do one thing above all else: they create a set of intense memories through which individuals come together to form a larger community. Over the last 11 years, we have celebrated and suffered together, experienced moments of extraordinary joy and extraordinary disappointment, said goodbye to old friends and welcomed new ones. All of these are essential parts of competition, and all of them are valuable. These are the gifts of knowing what it means to be in the fight. The most important thing is that we have done it all together. To have been a part of this journey, in whatever role, provides a value that reaches beyond numbers on a scoreboard.

This summer, the story of the Oklahoma City Thunder is transitioning to a new phase. Over the last few weeks, we have parted ways with foundational players — people who have represented our city to the world, who have sacrificed for us and flourished on our behalf. Although this has been painful, I also believe that — given the circumstances — it was necessary. In saying goodbye to the past, we have begun to chart our future. The next great Thunder team is out there somewhere, but it will take time to seize and discipline to ultimately sustain.

Oklahoma City expects, and deserves, extraordinary success. Delivering this is what drives us. But I want to be transparent and realistic about the process that meeting these types of expectations may require. Despite our city’s rapid rise and growth, Oklahoma City remains the second-smallest market in the NBA. While this brings many benefits, it also poses strategic challenges. Given the way the league’s system is designed, small market teams operate with significant disadvantages. There is no reason to pretend otherwise. This in no way means we cannot be extraordinarily successful — we, and several other small to mid-market teams, are our own best examples of the ability to overcome these realities. It simply means we must be thinking differently, optimistically, finding our advantages by other means.

In order to build — and then sustain — a truly great basketball team, it requires a method. This method is not guesswork or a convenient message that miscasts other’s good fortune as a repeatable skill. To build true excellence in any industry, and then sustain it, requires trading on time and playing the empirical odds. This will require strategic discipline and thoughtful patience, but these are values our organization has always held high. That’s how longevity is earned. It is important to remember that.

It will take us time, now, to reposition, replenish and then ultimately rebuild our team. Things will inevitably get harder from here. At some point during this transition, we may not have the kind of team you’ve been used to. But we will be fearless, focused, and relentless in seeking opportunities to improve our long-term position.

I believe that Oklahoma City is uniquely qualified to understand this challenge. The value of a long-term vision is woven into our city’s DNA. One of the city’s greatest triumphs is the story of MAPS. In the early 1990s, downtown was largely abandoned. What we know as Chesapeake Energy Arena was the site of an old Wonder Bread factory, and the Devon Tower was a giant parking lot. Instead of giving up on their city, voters decided to pass a revolutionary tax program to help rebuild it. This was a significant sacrifice, a huge investment, and yet for years there were no results. Critics, of course, stepped forward to claim that MAPS was a waste of time and money. But the people stuck with the plan. Today, the success of MAPS is legendary and still evolving. It laid the foundation on which downtown Oklahoma City has revived itself, and it has made us the envy of similar-sized cities across the country. All because the people and leadership believed in and committed to a long-term vision, even when things got hard.

Our ultimate goal is to build a team that will inspire the same kind of joy, success, and togetherness that we have all experienced over our first 11 years. This will take time and involve hard choices. There will always be the temptation to take shortcuts, to look for quick fixes, and to reach out for instant gratification. There will no doubt be criticisms — much of which we could all recite in advance right now. It is the job of the organization to resist those shortcuts, accept that criticism, and keep us deeply committed. If you want an exceptional outcome, you must be willing to be the exception. Therefore, my singular goal as we transition our basketball team is to reposition and replenish the organization to allow for optimal future success.

We are energized and optimistic about our future. Over the past two weeks, our reactions and adaptations have provided us a starting point. But the real work has yet to begin. Our goal is sustainable, long-term, collective excellence. The people of Oklahoma City should be able to one day watch the rise of another great team, as they have watched the rise of their rebuilt downtown, with the knowledge that they are witnessing something not only great but enduring. Invest today for a sustainable tomorrow. The journey now continues, and I am humbled and grateful to be part of it.