The 2018 Yankees season was decided by one single weekend series.

In the ninth inning of Sunday Night Baseball on Aug. 5, 2018, the Red Sox — down 4-1 — mounted a three-run comeback against Yankees’ closer Aroldis Chapman to tie the game and eventually walked it off in the 10th inning. Boston completed a four-game sweep of the Bronx Bombers, which essentially ended the American League East race, and forced the Yanks to gear up for the wild card game.

Revenge is sweet, and Aaron Boone’s club can do actual “damage” to the Red Sox organization this weekend.
Boston ended its series against the Rays on Wednesday night with a 56-47 record, 11 games back of the first-place Yankees, and two games back of a Wild Card spot. Their upcoming run of games will not only determine the direction of their season, it could alter the direction of their franchise.

Starting Thursday, Alex Cora’s squad has a four-game home set with the Bombers, followed by three more with the Rays, and then the grand finale — a four-game trip to the Bronx.
According to Mark Feinsand of MLB.com, “The Red Sox are on the fence about whether to buy or sell before July 31.” The Yankees have the chance to single handedly dismantle the Red Sox organization and violently finish off this Red Sox core.

Should the Yankees hammer the nail in the coffin of the 2019 Bosox, GM Dave Dombrowski will have plenty of reasons to consider making some moves before the deadline.

Prior to the MLB Draft, FanGraphs ranked Boston’s farm system as the worst in baseball. Any last asset they had was given out like candy on Halloween to acquire the likes of Chris Sale, Craig Kimbrel, and Rick Porcello. Sure, it was undoubtedly worth the price as they achieved the ultimate goal of winning the World Series.
However, the Red Sox made their bed, and now they have to lay in it. This isn’t the 108-win club from just a year ago, and a re-assessment of their situation is necessary.

The Red Sox actually have arguably the best offense in baseball, they’ve scored the most runs in the MLB and lead in team batting average. However, there are two glaring issues with this Red Sox team, their rotation, and their bullpen. Sale and Porcello have been colossal failures this season both having an ERA at or above four, and their bullpen has blown an AL-leading 18 games.

Starters and relievers tend to fly off the board at the July trade deadline, and there are many appealing players to be had in exchange this time around. The only issue is the Red Sox have zero minor league assets to acquire anyone more valuable than Andrew Cashner, who has allowed 10 runs in his first 11 Boston innings before Wednesday’s game.
There is virtually no room for improvement with this current core of Red Sox this season, or even beyond. Boston already owns the highest payroll in the league. They just handed Sale a five-year, $145 million extension, along with another $68 million to Nathan Eovaldi over four years. Xander Bogaerts received his big pay day with a $120 million contract, and David Price is due $96 million over the next three seasons.

Theoretically could the Red Sox surge over the final luxury tax threshold and go on a spending spree? Sure, they could. However, their reluctance to dish out more money this offseason to address their bullpen is a cause for concern. They chose to enter the season without spending on a closer, or a near competent reliever.

Boston has many attractive candidates to explore trading at the deadline. JD Martinez has an opt-out at the end of this season, Brock Holt is having a career year, batting north of .335 as a utility man, and could provide value to any contender. The Red Sox could receive decent minor-league assets in return for these two players, however, if they want to hit the motherload, Mookie Betts is a free agent after the 2020 season and will be due for a Mike Trout-like contract. If Boston truly hits the reset button, Betts is the guy to start with when trying to rebuild a foundation.

The Yankees could get the Red Sox back 10 times over after what occurred last season. New York can erase any lingering effects of the 2018 season, and have people remember the 2019 season as the year the Bombers put Boston back in their place and sent them into a rebuild.