The Team with No Flaws quietly reported to training camp Wednesday.

There was no drama. No holdouts. No major injury news. No press conferences (they start Thursday). No cornerbacks arriving in armored cars heralded by hype men with bullhorns.

In fact, there wasn't much hype at all.
Oh sure, some are picking the Philadelphia Eagles to win the NFC East and be part of the scrum competing for the Super Bowl. And there's a little Carson Wentz MVP chatter. But you can hear lawn equipment humming and trucks backing up in the above video of Eagles players reporting to team headquarters. When it comes to start-of-camp sizzle, this is a team on the back burner.

The Eagles won the Super Bowl two years ago. They survived an injury plague to reach the divisional round of the playoffs last season. They enjoyed a quietly spectacular offseason by addressing needs, adding new faces, getting healthy and locking Wentz into a long-term contract before the Dak Prescott-Jared Goff rush.

But the Eagles lack the Next Big Thing wattage of the Browns, the Saints' "this time it's personal" grudge against the league, the Bears' chest-thumping defense, the Chiefs' explosive offense or the noblesse oblige of the Patriots. That makes them just another playoff contender among many.

Overlooking the Team with No Flaws, however, would be a huge mistake.

Good luck finding a real weakness on the Eagles roster.It's rock-solid from top to bottom and back to front in a way no other team (no, not even the Patriots) can boast. Let's break things down:

   

Quarterback: Yes, Wentz failed to finish the last two seasons due to injuries. And no, Nick Foles isn't waiting by the bullpen phone anymore. But if you claim there's a young quarterback besides Pat Mahomes you would rather have on your team right now, you are just being a homer. 

   

Running back: A major weakness last year when multiple injuries forced the team to rely on undrafted rookie Josh Adams and third-year backup Wendell Smallwood. This year, former Bears Pro Bowler Jordan Howard will battle second-round pick Miles Sanders for carries, backed up by Darren Sproles, who's returning for his 150th year in the NFL. (15th, actually).

   

Wide receiver: Another injury-plagued unit in 2018. Alshon Jeffery and slot specialist Nelson Agholor are now joined by returning deep threat DeSean Jackson and rookie JJ Arcega-Whiteside, a sleeper favorite of the draft beatniks.