Usually we start out each week by talking about some ultraviolence that happened. But this week, I’d like to start out with something much happier. I fell in love over the weekend. Not the passing fancy kind of love, but the Real Deal Holyfield kind of love. This is who I fell in love with.
I know only three facts about Bokang Masunyane. His name is awesome, he is awesome, and I’m ready to fight anyone who disagrees. Consider this the official start of the Bokang Gang.

AL: “Little Giant” is billed at 5-foot-1 and that seems generous. He was definitely not generous with the way he treated Yusuke Ogikubo here. Despite giving up six inches in height to Ogikubo, Masunyane absolutely handles him for three rounds, just tossing him all over the cage.

Ogikubo went into this fight as the No. 5 ranked flyweight in Pancrase, so taking him out in such impressive fashion is nothing to sneeze at. Masunyane improved to 6-0 and now that Michel Pereira got that call to the big show, I think “Little Giant” is the guy I most want to see get a look from a major North American promotion.

Don’t take our word for it though, Pancrase 307 can be viewed in its entirety on UFC Fight Pass.

Also on this show, we had Bellator vet Rafael Silva showing what it takes to be almost 40 fights deep into a pro career and how to be a defending bantamweight champion in the lawless land of JMMA.

In the co-main event, Yuto Hokamura was absolutely drilling Silva with elbows to the dome, but that was just a setup for an awesome comeback.
I know this is gonna sound hypocritical coming from me, the leading proponent of cheating in MMA, but even I think those elbows were excessive.

I have no idea what the referee was doing, allowing Hokamura to obliterate the back of the head like that or, frankly, allowing the fight to continue as Silva took something in the neighborhood of 32 unanswered strikes there but I guess it’s a good thing he did. Full credit to Silva for gutting it out and then getting the win. That’s an incredibly impressive display of heart.
Arguably the best performance from Pancrase last week though came from the opening fight. Satoshi Date was spamming elbows like a video game character and then suddenly, one of them landed and that was all she wrote.