8 Lesser-Known Players Who Made the Moon Landing Possible
Mankind owes its giant leap to approximately 400,000 people, from engineers and scientists to secretaries. Here, we honor a few lesser-known faces behind the world's greatest technological feat as we wrap up our Apollo Week celebrations
NASA's only female engineer at the time is seen in the control room during the the liftoff of what would become the groundbreaking Apollo 11 Moon landing. (In this photo, Morgan is in the center covering part of her face with her left hand.)

Morgan, who was an Instrumentation Controller for Apollo 11, had to be granted special permission to be in the control room and routinely had to deal with inappropriate phone calls and workplace harassment.

She persisted and shattered barriers during her 45+ years with NASA until her retirement in the summer of 2003
We can thank Houbolt for figuring out how to get us safely to the Moon. His idea, the Lunar Orbit Rendezvous (LOR), called for the use of one Saturn V launch vehicle and two smaller crafts that would act as the lander and orbiter. Houbolt wanted the lander to be lightweight in order to more easily descend on the Moon's surface and ascend to head back to Earth.

Nearly everyone dismissed Houbolt's proposition because the plan required the lander and orbiter to link up again in order to get back home. Critics deemed the idea too risky, as the astronauts would be too far away for any kind of rescue mission.

But Houbolt wrote a letter, breaking rank in the process, to NASA Associate Administrator Robert Seamans detailing why his plan would work. The letter caught Seamans' attention and the rest is history
Jackson, a mathematician, aerospace engineer, and badass barrier breaker, was NASA's first black female engineer. She worked at Langley Research Center in Virginia and was one of the women whose stories were depicted in the hit film Hidden Figures.
math mathematician mathematic math mathematician mathematic
Jackson's equations helped the U.S. safely get a man on the Moon. For her tireless work, she was given the Apollo Group Achievement Award. Jackson retired from NASA in 1985 and passed away in early 2005
Johnson was a mathematician during her 33-year long tenure with NASA, where she worked on calculating launch trajectories and emergency backup return paths for various missions, including the backup plan for Apollo 11.

Some of Johnson's experience as a NASA employee was also chronicled in Hidden Figures. She was played by Taraji P. Henson
Finley was one of NASA's first human computers. She began working at NASA in 1958, manually calculating the trajectory of rocket launches.

At 82, she still works at the Jet Propulsion Lab as a Test Engineer, with no plans to retire any time soon. These days, she tests software, acts as a subsystem engineer, and is currently working on the mission to land on Jupiter
Kraft was NASA's first Flight Director. He oversaw many historic events, including the Apollo 11 Moon landing and Alan Shepard becoming the first American to walk in space.

Kraft implemented several NASA protocols under his direction until leaving the Agency in 1982, after which he consulted for companies like IBM. Kraft passed away on July 22, just two days after the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission
Foraker was a senior seamstress who worked under the International Latex Corporation (ILC)—a division of Playtex (yeah, the underwear brand)—hand-sewing the spacesuits worn by the Apollo 11 crew. Neil Armstrong's suit is pictured here.

Foraker and other seamstresses worked tirelessly on modified Singer machines to sew 21 layers of fabric together to create suits that would keep the astronauts safe in the harsh outer space conditions. Foraker shared that she worked 80-hour weeks with no days off for three consecutive years and had two nervous breakdowns during this time
Northcutt helped get the Apollo 11 crew home safely by verifying the return trajectory calculations. She also broke barriers by being the first female engineer to work in Mission Control. After leaving NASA, Northcutt went on to become a criminal law attorney