Dragons to at least double their money on biggest offer ever made in the Den
In less than a year Dragons Tej Lalvani and Jenny Campbell look set to make a killing on their investment in energy company Look After My Bills
Last year two men walked out of Dragons' Den with more money for less of their business than anyone had ever managed before.

Will Hodson and Henry De Zoete were pitching their energy switching business - Look After My Bills - where customers are moved to a new cheap energy deal automatically when their tariff expires.

All five Dragons made offers to invest in the business - with the co-founders eventually agreeing to take £120,000 for just 3% of their business from Dragons Tej Lalvani and Jenny Campbell.

Almost exactly a year later, and the decision to invest has proved a wise one, with the Dragons at least doubling their money - and perhaps tripling it - after the people behind GoCompare.com bought the business.

The Dragons investment valued the business at £4 million, GoCo just paid £8.5million to buy it - potentially rising to £12.5million if performance targets are met.
Campbell said: "This deal is evidence of another successful Dragons’ Den investment. The Den puts entrepreneurs through their paces and only the very best can get investment in their business.

"Tej and I were delighted to be able to fight off the other Dragons to make sure we got the deal. It’s certainly proven to be the right move."

But while the Dragons might be smiling, there were confused looks elsewhere - especially as GoCompare already has an automatic energy switching service called WeFlip .

So why buy it when you have one already? GoCompare argues the businesses complement each other.

GoCo group chief executive Matthew Crummack said: "Weflip and Look After My Bills complement each other in their approach to saving UK consumers money and with both brands we can target the significant saving opportunities that still exist for consumers, that haven't been tackled by existing price comparison websites or regulation."
He added: "Jointly we have the skills, technology and discipline to address the substantial opportunity in addressing the 'infrequent switchers' and save the UK billions by switching."

And the founders of Look After My Bills are positive too, following the £8.5 million sale of their business.

"For us it's been an incredible ride as we've built a fantastic team of energy experts and a culture that will not accept any one of our users being overcharged," they said.

"Joining forces with GoCo Group will help us bring Look After My Bills even more into the mainstream."

Others were less convinced.

George Chalmers, chief executive of rival auto-switching service Migrate, said: “Today’s news is particularly  interesting when you consider the huge amount of criticism Look After My Bills and the Big Deal has aimed towards comparison sites over the past few years.

"As a result, to see them join forces with one of the most recognisable comparison sites in the UK, will certainly raise a few eyebrows."

The timing also raised questions, with the acquisition going through just under a year after the famous Dragon's Den appearance turbo-boosted customers signing up to Look After My Bills.

Given the service switches people once a year, that means that all the people who signed up afterwards will now be switched for the first time under the new regime - not the small company they signed up to.