BAGGAGE BELT HELL Boy, 2, hurt after climbing on airport baggage belt that carried him off and dumped him in luggage room
A CURIOUS toddler broke his hand after jumping on a luggage conveyor belt at an American airport while his mum was printing their boarding passes.

Edith Vega said she “freaked out” upon realising that her boy, two, had dashed off while her back was turned, and survived being knocked by heavy suitcases on a five-minute-long journey.
The drama – which was captured on CCTV – took place at the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport in Atlanta, Georgia.

Edith told WSB-TV that she had put Lorenzo down for a moment while checking-in at the Spirit Airlines ticket counter.

Once she saw her lad flailing on the conveyor belt, she rushed over to save him, but he was at “the end of the machine. I couldn’t catch up”.

Lorenzo ended up going on a “long ride” while his upset mum panicked and “went blank” at the terminal.

She said she wanted to “jump” on the belt and get him, but staff didn’t let her
Further along, Lorenzo desperately tries to escape the conveyor belt, by trying to climb on a suitcase
Minutes later, staff finally see him, and manage to take him to safety
Edith added: “I was just freaking out and I’m like, ‘Oh my goodness, I hope he’s OK. I hope he’s enjoying the ride'.”

One terrifying part of the CCTV footage shows the boy desperately trying to scramble away, clutching onto a suitcase as he manages to partially climb on top of it, before being pulled further into the conveyor system.

Five minutes later, Lorenzo ends up in the luggage room after going down a chute, stunning staff who can be seen suddenly leaping into action to grab him from the belt.

Lorenzo escaped with a fractured hand after being stuck between suitcases much bigger than him.

After he was taken to a local hospital for treatment, his relieved mum told the broadcaster she was “thankful he’s alive”
Hartsfield-Jackson said: "Officers with Atlanta Police and Atlanta Fire and Rescue responded to an incident at [the airport] involving a small child who accessed the automated baggage screening system via the Spirit Airlines ticket counter.

The Transportation Security Administration and other partners are also assisting with the investigation into the incident."

The airline said that the ticket counter was closed at the time of the incident, and no staff members had been around to pluck the boy from the conveyor belt