Great Western Railway warns of possible service reductions due to heat
 THE rail company that operates to and from Taunton Station is warning passengers some train services will be cancelled this afternoon.

Great Western Railway says there will be "a reduced service after midday" because of the "significant temperatures".

It is warning people travelling by train to check before they arrive at stations.

The announcement comes as Network Rail is predicting track temperatures of more than 50˚C.

The heat will possibly lead to speed restrictions on lines in the London Paddington area and the knock-on effect will be a reduction in the number of long-distance services able to operate and longer train journeys.
 GWR managing director Mark Hopwood said: "Speed restrictions will be put in place on our network, but the extent of those restrictions can only be determined by conditions on the ground and are likely to change throughout the day.

"We will continue to run as many trains as we can but those travelling should be aware that we will have to reduce the number of trains we can run, journey times will take longer, and those trains we can run will be much busier.

"Please do heed the usual advice to travel with water, and if you hold a ticket for tomorrow and would like to travel on Friday, we have eased restrictions so that you are able to do so."

The priority will be to keep trains running and customers moving safely, but changes to services are likely to be needed to allow that to happen.

Morning services are currently expected to run as normal, but as temperatures rise throughout the early part of the day GWR may have to reduced half-hourly train services to hourly on key routes. Trains that are able to run are expected to be busy.

Network Rail’s route director Mike Gallop said: "Keeping passengers moving safely and as quickly as possible is our priority as we tackle the impact of the extreme temperatures on the railway.

"We are doing all we can to minimise the number of speed restrictions necessary and reduce delays.
 "We advise passengers to check before they travel and to stay hydrated with free water fountains available at Bristol Temple Meads, Reading and London Paddington."

If your train is cancelled you are able to board the next available service, and you may be entitled to delay repay compensation if you are delayed by 15 minutes or more.

Those who choose not to travel at all will be able to claim a refund on the single part of their ticket - keep your ticket and visit GWR.com/DelayRepay

Be aware of the high temperatures, don't forget to travel with bottled drinking water, sun cream and cooling face wipes/spray